istio/README.md, before:

# Istio check

## Overview

Datadog monitors every aspect of your Istio environment, so you can:
- Assess the health of Envoy and the Istio control plane with logs ([see below](#log-collection)).
- Break down the performance of your service mesh with request, bandwidth, and resource consumption metrics ([see below](#metrics)).
- Map network communication between containers, pods, and services over the mesh with [Network Performance Monitoring][18].
- Drill into distributed traces for applications transacting over the mesh with [APM][19].

To learn more about monitoring your Istio environment with Datadog, [see the Istio blog][20].

## Setup

Follow the instructions below to install and configure this check for an Agent running on a host. For containerized environments, see the [Autodiscovery Integration Templates][1] for guidance on applying these instructions.

### Installation

Istio is included in the Datadog Agent. [Install the Datadog Agent][2] on your Istio servers or in your cluster and point it at Istio.

#### Envoy

If you want to monitor the Envoy proxies in Istio, configure the [Envoy integration][22].

### Configuration

Edit the `istio.d/conf.yaml` file (in the `conf.d/` folder at the root of your [Agent's configuration directory][3]) to connect to Istio. See the [sample istio.d/conf.yaml][4] for all available configuration options.

#### Metric collection
To monitor the `istiod` deployment and `istio-proxy` in Istio `v1.5+`, use the following configuration:
    
    ```yaml
    init_config:
    
    instances:
      - use_openmetrics: true
      - istiod_endpoint: http://istiod.istio-system:15014/metrics
      - istio_mesh_endpoint: http://istio-proxy.istio-system:15090/stats/prometheus
        exclude_labels:
         - source_version
         - destination_version
         - source_canonical_revision
         - destination_canonical_revision
         - source_principal
         - destination_principal
         - source_cluster
         - destination_cluster
         - source_canonical_service
         - destination_canonical_service
         - source_workload_namespace
         - destination_workload_namespace
         - request_protocol
         - connection_security_policy
    ```
   
**Note**: `connectionID` Prometheus label is excluded, the [sample istio.d/conf.yaml][4] also has a list of suggested labels to exclude.


   Istio mesh metrics are now only available from `istio-proxy` containers which are supported out-of-the-box via autodiscovery, see [`istio.d/auto_conf.yaml`][17].   

#### OpenMetrics V2 vs OpenMetrics V1
Setting `use_openmetrics` to `true` uses the OpenMetrics V2 implementation of the check. 
This change is the default option as of Agent 7.33.x. However, setting `use_openmetrics: false` 
returns to the OpenMetrics V1 implementation. For more information, see [the GitHub Pull Request for the change][23].

The main differences between OpenMetrics V1 and OpenMetrics V2 are the metrics that are changed. All `*.count` and `*.sum` have changed type from `gauge` to `monotonic_count`.
The following metrics are new in OpenMetrics V2:

```shell
istio.galley.validation.config_update_error.count
istio.galley.validation.config_update.count
istio.galley.validation.failed.count
istio.go.memstats.frees.count
istio.go.memstats.lookups.count
istio.go.memstats.mallocs.count
istio.grpc.server.handled.count
istio.grpc.server.msg_received.count
istio.grpc.server.msg_sent.count
istio.grpc.server.started.count
istio.pilot.inbound_updates.count
istio.pilot.k8s.cfg_events.count
istio.pilot.k8s.reg_events.count
istio.pilot.push.triggers.count
istio.pilot.xds.pushes.count
istio.process.cpu_seconds.count
istio.sidecar_injection.requests.count
istio.sidecar_injection.success.count
istio.mesh.tcp.connections_closed.count
istio.mesh.tcp.connections_opened.count
istio.mesh.tcp.received_bytes.count
istio.mesh.tcp.send_bytes.count
istio.grpc.server.handling_seconds.bucket
istio.pilot.proxy_convergence_time.bucket
istio.pilot.proxy_queue_time.bucket
istio.pilot.xds.push.time.bucket
istio.mesh.request.duration.milliseconds.bucket
istio.mesh.response.size.bucket
istio.mesh.request.size.bucket
```

To view the metrics that are collected using OpenMetrics V1, see [the metadata.csv file][24]. 
To view the configuration parameters for OpenMetrics V1, see [the `conf.yaml.example` file][25].

**WARNING**: If you have multiple existing instances of Datadog collecting Istio metrics, make sure to use the same implementation of OpenMetrics for all of them. Otherwise, the metric type will repeatedly switch between the two.

##### Disable sidecar injection for Datadog Agent pods

If you are installing the [Datadog Agent in a container][10], Datadog recommends that you first disable Istio's sidecar injection.

Add the `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` annotation to the `datadog-agent` DaemonSet:

```yaml
...
spec:
   ...
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"
     ...
```

This can also be done with the `kubectl patch` command.

```text
kubectl patch daemonset datadog-agent -p '{"spec":{"template":{"metadata":{"annotations":{"sidecar.istio.io/inject":"false"}}}}}'
```

#### Log collection

Istio contains two types of logs. Envoy access logs that are collected with the [Envoy integration][12] and [Istio logs][11].

_Available for Agent versions >6.0_

See the [Autodiscovery Integration Templates][1] for guidance on applying the parameters below.
Collecting logs is disabled by default in the Datadog Agent. To enable it, see [Kubernetes log collection documentation][16].

| Parameter      | Value                                                |
| -------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| `<LOG_CONFIG>` | `{"source": "istio", "service": "<SERVICE_NAME>"}` |

### Validation

[Run the Agent's `info` subcommand][6] and look for `istio` under the Checks section.

## Data Collected

### Metrics

See [metadata.csv][7] for a list of metrics provided by this check.

### Events

The Istio check does not include any events.

### Service Checks

See [service_checks.json][21] for a list of service checks provided by this integration.

## Troubleshooting

Need help? Contact [Datadog support][8].

## Further Reading

Additional helpful documentation, links, and articles:

- [Monitor your Istio service mesh with Datadog][9]
- [Learn how Datadog collects key metrics to monitor Istio][14]
- [How to monitor Istio with Datadog][21]

[1]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/integrations/
[2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings#agent
[3]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-configuration-files/#agent-configuration-directory
[4]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/datadog_checks/istio/data/conf.yaml.example
[5]: https://istio.io/docs/tasks/telemetry/metrics/querying-metrics
[6]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-commands/#agent-status-and-information
[7]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/metadata.csv
[8]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/
[9]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/monitor-istio-with-datadog
[10]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/
[11]: https://istio.io/docs/tasks/telemetry/logs/collecting-logs/
[12]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/envoy/#log-collection
[13]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-commands/#start-stop-and-restart-the-agent
[14]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/istio-metrics/
[15]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/integration-management/#install
[16]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/log/
[17]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/datadog_checks/istio/data/auto_conf.yaml
[18]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/monitor-istio-with-npm/
[19]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/setup_overview/proxy_setup/?tab=istio
[20]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/istio-datadog/
[21]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/assets/service_checks.json
[22]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/tree/master/envoy#istio
[23]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/pull/9588
[24]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/7.32.x/istio/metadata.csv
[25]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/7.32.x/istio/datadog_checks/istio/data/conf.yaml.example

Commit message:

Apply suggestions from code review
Co-authored-by: Christine Chen <ChristineTChen@users.noreply.github.com>

istio/README.md, after:

# Istio check

## Overview

Datadog monitors every aspect of your Istio environment, so you can:
- Assess the health of Envoy and the Istio control plane with logs ([see below](#log-collection)).
- Break down the performance of your service mesh with request, bandwidth, and resource consumption metrics ([see below](#metrics)).
- Map network communication between containers, pods, and services over the mesh with [Network Performance Monitoring][18].
- Drill into distributed traces for applications transacting over the mesh with [APM][19].

To learn more about monitoring your Istio environment with Datadog, [see the Istio blog][20].

## Setup

Follow the instructions below to install and configure this check for an Agent running on a host. For containerized environments, see the [Autodiscovery Integration Templates][1] for guidance on applying these instructions.

### Installation

Istio is included in the Datadog Agent. [Install the Datadog Agent][2] on your Istio servers or in your cluster and point it at Istio.

#### Envoy

If you want to monitor the Envoy proxies in Istio, configure the [Envoy integration][22].

### Configuration

Edit the `istio.d/conf.yaml` file (in the `conf.d/` folder at the root of your [Agent's configuration directory][3]) to connect to Istio. See the [sample istio.d/conf.yaml][4] for all available configuration options.

#### Metric collection
To monitor the `istiod` deployment and `istio-proxy` in Istio `v1.5+`, use the following configuration:
    
    ```yaml
    init_config:
    
    instances:
      - use_openmetrics: true
      - istiod_endpoint: http://istiod.istio-system:15014/metrics
      - istio_mesh_endpoint: http://istio-proxy.istio-system:15090/stats/prometheus
        exclude_labels:
         - source_version
         - destination_version
         - source_canonical_revision
         - destination_canonical_revision
         - source_principal
         - destination_principal
         - source_cluster
         - destination_cluster
         - source_canonical_service
         - destination_canonical_service
         - source_workload_namespace
         - destination_workload_namespace
         - request_protocol
         - connection_security_policy
    ```
   
**Note**: `connectionID` Prometheus label is excluded, the [sample istio.d/conf.yaml][4] also has a list of suggested labels to exclude.


   Istio mesh metrics are now only available from `istio-proxy` containers which are supported out-of-the-box via autodiscovery, see [`istio.d/auto_conf.yaml`][17].   

#### OpenMetrics V2 vs OpenMetrics V1
Enabling the `use_openmetrics` configuration option, the Istio integration will use the OpenMetrics V2 implementation of the check. 


Disable `use_openmetrics` configuration option to utilize the OpenMetrics V1 implementation.

In OpenMetrics V2, metrics are submitted more accurately by default and behave closer to Prometheus metric types. For example, prometheus metrics ending in  `_count` and `_sum` are now submitted as `monotonic_count` by default.
The following metrics are new in OpenMetrics V2:

```shell
istio.galley.validation.config_update_error.count
istio.galley.validation.config_update.count
istio.galley.validation.failed.count
istio.go.memstats.frees.count
istio.go.memstats.lookups.count
istio.go.memstats.mallocs.count
istio.grpc.server.handled.count
istio.grpc.server.msg_received.count
istio.grpc.server.msg_sent.count
istio.grpc.server.started.count
istio.pilot.inbound_updates.count
istio.pilot.k8s.cfg_events.count
istio.pilot.k8s.reg_events.count
istio.pilot.push.triggers.count
istio.pilot.xds.pushes.count
istio.process.cpu_seconds.count
istio.sidecar_injection.requests.count
istio.sidecar_injection.success.count
istio.mesh.tcp.connections_closed.count
istio.mesh.tcp.connections_opened.count
istio.mesh.tcp.received_bytes.count
istio.mesh.tcp.send_bytes.count
istio.grpc.server.handling_seconds.bucket
istio.pilot.proxy_convergence_time.bucket
istio.pilot.proxy_queue_time.bucket
istio.pilot.xds.push.time.bucket
istio.mesh.request.duration.milliseconds.bucket
istio.mesh.response.size.bucket
istio.mesh.request.size.bucket
```

To view the configuration parameters for OpenMetrics V1, see [the `conf.yaml.example` file][25].

**WARNING**: If you have multiple existing instances of Datadog collecting Istio metrics, make sure to use the same implementation of OpenMetrics for all of them. Otherwise, the metrics data will fluctuate in the Datadog app.

##### Disable sidecar injection for Datadog Agent pods

If you are installing the [Datadog Agent in a container][10], Datadog recommends that you first disable Istio's sidecar injection.

Add the `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` annotation to the `datadog-agent` DaemonSet:

```yaml
...
spec:
   ...
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"
     ...
```

This can also be done with the `kubectl patch` command.

```text
kubectl patch daemonset datadog-agent -p '{"spec":{"template":{"metadata":{"annotations":{"sidecar.istio.io/inject":"false"}}}}}'
```

#### Log collection

Istio contains two types of logs. Envoy access logs that are collected with the [Envoy integration][12] and [Istio logs][11].

_Available for Agent versions >6.0_

See the [Autodiscovery Integration Templates][1] for guidance on applying the parameters below.
Collecting logs is disabled by default in the Datadog Agent. To enable it, see [Kubernetes log collection documentation][16].

| Parameter      | Value                                                |
| -------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| `<LOG_CONFIG>` | `{"source": "istio", "service": "<SERVICE_NAME>"}` |

### Validation

[Run the Agent's `info` subcommand][6] and look for `istio` under the Checks section.

## Data Collected

### Metrics

See [metadata.csv][7] for a list of metrics provided by this check.

### Events

The Istio check does not include any events.

### Service Checks

See [service_checks.json][21] for a list of service checks provided by this integration.

## Troubleshooting

Need help? Contact [Datadog support][8].

## Further Reading

Additional helpful documentation, links, and articles:

- [Monitor your Istio service mesh with Datadog][9]
- [Learn how Datadog collects key metrics to monitor Istio][14]
- [How to monitor Istio with Datadog][21]

[1]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/integrations/
[2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings#agent
[3]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-configuration-files/#agent-configuration-directory
[4]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/datadog_checks/istio/data/conf.yaml.example
[5]: https://istio.io/docs/tasks/telemetry/metrics/querying-metrics
[6]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-commands/#agent-status-and-information
[7]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/metadata.csv
[8]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/
[9]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/monitor-istio-with-datadog
[10]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/
[11]: https://istio.io/docs/tasks/telemetry/logs/collecting-logs/
[12]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/envoy/#log-collection
[13]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-commands/#start-stop-and-restart-the-agent
[14]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/istio-metrics/
[15]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/integration-management/#install
[16]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/kubernetes/log/
[17]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/datadog_checks/istio/data/auto_conf.yaml
[18]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/monitor-istio-with-npm/
[19]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/setup_overview/proxy_setup/?tab=istio
[20]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/istio-datadog/
[21]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/istio/assets/service_checks.json
[22]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/tree/master/envoy#istio
[23]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/pull/9588
[24]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/7.32.x/istio/metadata.csv
[25]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/7.32.x/istio/datadog_checks/istio/data/conf.yaml.example
